## This repository contains the simulation code for the article "Social learning for population Adaptation"

#### Authors: 
**Dharanish Rajendra and Chaitanya S. Gokhale**,

Chair for Computational and Theoretical Biology, Julius-Maximilians-Universität
Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany

*Corresponding author*: [chaitanya.gokhale@uni-wuerzburg.de](mailto:chaitanya.gokhale@uni-wuerzburg.de)

#### Abstract:
Animals do not learn in isolation. 
From foraging tits to working humans, individuals routinely observe what their neighbours do and adjust their own behaviour accordingly. 
Such social learning sits alongside asocial trial-and-error as one of two principal mechanisms by which populations adapt within a generation, and the foundation on which cumulative culture is built. 
Yet most theories of social learning treat either the cognitive process of a single learner or the population spread of a single trait.
Rarely both at once and rarely in the multi-state, sequential decision problems that organisms actually face.
Here, we close this gap. 
We construct the Social Actor-Critic, a biologically motivated learning rule that combines reinforcement learning with demonstrator-based copying, and embed it in a population of interacting agents. 
In the large-population limit, the dynamics reduce to a tractable system of equations for the mean policy and its covariance.
This result is valid for arbitrary sizes of a class of finite Markov decision processes. 
Using this framework, we ask when social learning helps a population adapt. 
We find that even modest reliance on social information can dramatically accelerate early adaptation.
Social learning becomes more beneficial the larger the underlying problem, provided sufficient population variation.
However, above a critical social-learning propensity, if the demonstrators are not carefully chosen, the population can become trapped in collectively suboptimal equilibria whose basins of attraction grow with task complexity.

---

## Overview

This repository is organised into one folder:

1. `SimulationCode` contains the code used for running simulations and regenerating the dataset required for creating the figures
2. `FigureSources` contains the scripts used for plotting the figures 
3. `Data` contains the datasets generated by the codes in SimulationCodes and are used in the scripts in FigureSources to create the figures

## Installing Julia

All of the code in this repository is written in the `Julia` programming language. 
To run the simulations and replicate the code, one needs to install `Julia v1.11.5` and all the packages required. 
As the code here was written for v1.10.2 of the language, we recommend that this version is used to ensure perfect reproducibility.

1. Follow the instructions here: https://julialang.org/install/. This will install `juliaup`, the version manager for Julia and also the latest stable version of the Julia programming language. 
2. Install v1.10.2 of the language `juliaup add 1.11.5`. 
3. To make this the default version, run the command `juliaup default 1.11.5`. 
4. Otherwise, every time Julia is run, one would have to add `julia +1.11.5` in order to launch the desired version. 

## Installing required packages

The required Julia environment with the specific versions of the necessary packages can be recreated with the `Project.toml` and `Manifest.toml` files. 
The process to do this is as follows:
1. Open a terminal in the directory of this repository
2. Launch a Julia REPL with: `julia --project=.`
3. Install all the packages with: `] instantiate`
4. Hit `backspace` to exit the package manager. Now you are ready to run the scripts in this repository.

## SimulationCode

This folder contains the code to perform the simulations to generate the dataset required for creating the figures.
These files can be run, by first starting a Julia REPL as Step 1-2 above and running the following: `include("SimulationCode/<name of file>")`, where `<name of file>` is replaced by the name of the code file.


1. `n_state_SAC_steady_state.jl` calculates the stable equilibrium reached for an ensemble of random initial conditions for a given set of parameters. The data from this is used to calculate the size of basins of attraction and the critical thresholds / phase transition points. This data is used for generating Figure 2.
2. `n_state_SAC_learning_times.jl` calculates the learning times from random policy to the set expertise target for a range of parameter values. Datasets generated from this file for different parameter combinations are used to make the plots of relative adaptation speed. These form the bulk of the datasets of the project and are used in Figures 3-5, S2-S11, and S16.
3. `tpn_action_SAC_learning_times.jl` calculates the learning times for transformed problem where states are transformed to actions i.e. learning is at the scale of the episode insteads of actions. Data from these simulations are used  in Figure S12.
4. `CG_SAC_learning_times` calculates the learning times for policy copying. This is used in Figures S13-S15.
5. The folder `lib` contains the core code required to perform any of these calculations, including the second order adjoint method for the eigenvector problem.

The full dataset generated by these simulation codes is available in the folder `Data`.

## FigureSources

This folder contains all the datasets generated by the simulation codes above.
The codes will display and save a pdf of the Figure corresponding to their names. 
To create the figures, first start a Julia REPL as above and run the following: `include("FigureSources/Figure_<number>.jl")`.
Here `<number>` is to be replaced by the number of the Figure required (except Figure 1).

## Data

These datasets in this folder are tables stored in the [Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org/) format. 